.\" Manpage for imx.
.\" Mirror of the imx --help text; keep in sync with crates/cli/src/main.rs.
.TH IMX 1 "2026-05-28" "imx 0.19.0" "IMX Manual"
.SH NAME
imx \- memory-safe, deterministic, differentially-verified image conversion CLI
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B imx
.B \-\-help
.br
.B imx
.B \-\-version
.br
.B imx identify
.RI [ FORMAT :] input
.br
.B imx identify \-\-json
.RI [ FORMAT :] input
.br
.B imx report \-\-json
.RI [ FORMAT :] input
.br
.B imx resize
.IR geometry " " "[FORMAT:]input " "[FORMAT:]output"
.br
.B imx resize-fit
.IR <width>x<height> " " "[FORMAT:]input " "[FORMAT:]output"
.br
.B imx crop
.IR <width>x<height>+<x>+<y> " " "[FORMAT:]input " "[FORMAT:]output"
.br
.B imx rotate
.IR <90|180|270> " " "[FORMAT:]input " "[FORMAT:]output"
.br
.B imx flip
.RI [ FORMAT :] input " " [ FORMAT :] output
.br
.B imx flop
.RI [ FORMAT :] input " " [ FORMAT :] output
.br
.B imx pipeline
.RI [ FORMAT :] input " " [ FORMAT :] output " \-\-op " <op> " [\-\-op " <op> "]..."
.br
.B imx batch-convert \-\-to
.I FORMAT
.B \-\-output-dir
.IR dir " [\-\-resize " <width>x<height> "|\-\-resize-fit " <width>x<height> "] [\-\-quality " <1..=100> "] [FORMAT:]input..."
.br
.B imx self-test
.br
.B imx completions
.RI < bash | zsh | fish >
.br
.B imx
.RI [ \-\-quality " " <1..=100> ] " " [ FORMAT :] input " " [ FORMAT :] output
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B imx
is a memory-safe, deterministic, differentially-verified image conversion
library and command-line tool. It decodes, identifies, transcodes, resizes, and
applies right-angle geometry operations to images, producing byte-identical
output for a given input. It is not a fork or port of ImageMagick and does not
provide the
.BR convert ,
.BR magick ,
or
.B mogrify
commands.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B identify [\-\-json] [FORMAT:]<input>
Print one stable key-value metadata line for the input image, or with
.B \-\-json
emit a deterministic JSON object with
.IR schema_version ,
.IR format ,
.IR width ,
.IR height ,
.IR channels ,
and
.IR depth .
.TP
.B report \-\-json [FORMAT:]<input>
Print a deterministic single-input JSON report with
.I status
(supported or unsupported) and a stable
.I diagnostic_code
over the existing identify metadata.
.TP
.B resize <width>x<height>|<width>x|x<height>|<percent>% [FORMAT:]<input> [FORMAT:]<output>
Resize with center-sampled nearest-neighbor sampling. Supported geometries are
exact dimensions
.RB ( <width>x<height> ),
single-axis aspect-preserving
.RB ( <width>x " or " x<height> ),
and uniform percent
.RB ( <percent>% ).
.TP
.B resize-fit <width>x<height> [FORMAT:]<input> [FORMAT:]<output>
Resize preserving aspect ratio to the largest integer box that fits within the
requested dimensions.
.TP
.B crop <width>x<height>+<x>+<y> [FORMAT:]<input> [FORMAT:]<output>
Extract a bounds-checked rectangular region. Format-preserving.
.TP
.B rotate <90|180|270> [FORMAT:]<input> [FORMAT:]<output>
Rotate clockwise by 90, 180, or 270 degrees. Format-preserving.
.TP
.B flip [FORMAT:]<input> [FORMAT:]<output>
Flip vertically. Format-preserving.
.TP
.B flop [FORMAT:]<input> [FORMAT:]<output>
Flop horizontally. Format-preserving.
.TP
.B pipeline [FORMAT:]<input> [FORMAT:]<output> \-\-op <op> [\-\-op <op>]...
Apply an ordered list of operations in a single decode/encode pass. Supported
.I \-\-op
values are
.IR resize: <geometry> ,
.IR resize-fit: <width>x<height> ,
.IR crop: <width>x<height>+<x>+<y> ,
.IR rotate: <90|180|270> ,
.IR flip ,
and
.IR flop .
Ops apply left-to-right, so order matters, and at least one
.I \-\-op
is required. Output is byte-deterministic and equivalent to running the same
ops as sequential subcommands. Format-preserving.
.TP
.B batch-convert \-\-to <FORMAT> \-\-output-dir <dir> [\-\-resize <width>x<height>|\-\-resize-fit <width>x<height>] [\-\-quality <1..=100>] [FORMAT:]<input>...
Convert shell-expanded input paths into an existing output directory with an
explicit output format. Optionally resize each input. Optionally set JPEG
.IR \-\-quality .
Output names are deterministic; there is no overwrite or collision renaming.
.TP
.B self-test
Run the offline install confidence check for identify, transcode, resize,
resize-fit, and batch-convert across the supported formats.
.TP
.B completions <bash|zsh|fish>
Print a hand-written shell completion script for the named shell to standard
output.
.TP
.B [\-\-quality <1..=100>] [FORMAT:]<input> [FORMAT:]<output>
Transcode between formats, including deterministic same-format rewrites.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print the help text and exit 0.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the version and exit 0.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit deterministic JSON output for
.B identify
and
.BR report .
.TP
.B \-\-to <FORMAT>
Output format for
.BR batch-convert .
.TP
.B \-\-output-dir <dir>
Existing output directory for
.BR batch-convert .
.TP
.B \-\-resize <width>x<height>
Exact resize applied to each input during
.BR batch-convert .
.TP
.B \-\-resize-fit <width>x<height>
Aspect-preserving fit applied to each input during
.BR batch-convert .
.TP
.B \-\-quality <1..=100>
JPEG output quality (default 90). Applies only when the output format is JPEG;
rejected for non-JPEG output.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-auto\-orient
Disable EXIF/TIFF Orientation auto-rotation on decode. By default the
Orientation tag (values 1\(en8) is applied so JPEG and TIFF images decode
upright, swapping reported width and height for the rotated orientations
(5\(en8). This global flag keeps the raw stored pixels and dimensions instead.
Missing or malformed orientation metadata is always treated as orientation 1
(no-op).
.TP
.B \-\-strip
Drop the embedded ICC color profile before encoding. Embedded ICC profiles are
otherwise preserved on decode and written back on encode for PNG (iCCP chunk),
JPEG (APP2 ICC_PROFILE segments), and TIFF (tag 34675); the profile survives
geometry transforms but is dropped by colorspace conversions. This global flag
applies to every command that encodes output.
.SH FORMATS
Supported formats (read and write):
.B bmp
(.bmp),
.B farbfeld
(.ff, .farbfeld),
.B jpeg
(.jpg, .jpeg),
.B qoi
(.qoi),
.B pbm
(.pbm),
.B pgm
(.pgm),
.B png
(.png),
.B ppm
(.ppm),
.B webp
(.webp). WEBP output is lossless.
.PP
Input-only formats:
.B gif
(.gif). The GIF decoder reads only the first frame and ignores animation.
.PP
Supported uppercase format prefixes:
.BR BMP: ", " FARBFELD: ", " JPEG: ", " QOI: ", " PBM: ", " PGM: ", " PNG: ", " PPM: ", " WEBP: .
Input-only prefix:
.BR GIF: .
A prefix is stripped before file IO and must match the detected input format or
the output extension.
.SH STREAMING
Use
.B \-
as a path together with a
.B FORMAT:
prefix to read input from standard input and/or write output to standard output
(for example
.BR PNG:- ).
Only image bytes are written to standard output.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Operation error: data, IO, malformed-input, or validation failure. Diagnostics
are printed to standard error with an
.B error:
prefix.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error or unsupported command shape.
.SH UNSUPPORTED
GIF as an output target, GIF animation or multi-frame decoding, recursive
directory walking, arbitrary-angle rotation, delegates, and
formats beyond BMP, FARBFELD, GIF, JPEG, QOI, PBM, PGM, PNG, PPM, and WEBP.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Identify an image:
.B imx identify photo.png
.TP
Identify as JSON:
.B imx identify \-\-json photo.png
.TP
Transcode between formats:
.B imx photo.png photo.jpg
.TP
Resize to exact dimensions:
.B imx resize 800x600 photo.png thumb.png
.TP
Stream through standard input and output:
.B cat photo.png | imx PNG:- JPEG:- > photo.jpg
.TP
Print bash completions:
.B imx completions bash
.SH SEE ALSO
Project documentation and the behavior contract live in the IMX repository
README and COMPATIBILITY documents.
